---
layout: post
title:  GIT
date: 2024-01-20 00:00:00
description: Trust Your Gradient; Gradient-based Intervention Targeting for Causal Discovery
tags: formatting diagrams
categories: sample-posts
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

## Why?

Causal structure discovery aims to recover the ground truth graph G. The solution to this problem is not uniquely defined when having access only to observational data from the ground truth distribution $P$. Formally, it can be determined solely up to a Markov Equivalence Class [MEC]({% post_url markov-equivalence-class %}) without additional restrictive assumptions. To achieve identifiability, data from interventions need to be gathered.

## Intervention

# Structural Causal Models

Causal relationships can be formalized using structural causal models (SCM). The joint distribution factorizes according to

$$ P(X_1, X_2, ..., X_n) = \Phi_{i=1}^n P(X_i | PA_i) $$

Which is called Markov property assumption.

$$P() P(Xi|PAi) \Phi P(X_j|PA_j).$$


## GIT Method

1. GIT scores each possible intervention target by calculating the expected magnitude of the gradient using imaginary interventional data generated by the causal model. Gradient magnitude serves as a proxy for the size of the update that can be induced on the parameters of the causal model. For a given intervention we define:

$$ s_i = E||\nabla _\rho \mathbb{L}(X)||$$

The expected value is computed with the interventional distribution coming from the model.

The expected value in $s_i$ is approximated using the Monte-Carlo method (line 4).

## GIT Requirements

## Theoretical justification

# GIT with ENCO converges

1. Vertices for which the model structure is not aligned with the ground truth will have non-trivial gradients and hence will be queried by GIT, allowing the model to improve

2. GIT gradients are well correlated with the principled GPG signal of GIT-privileged

# Given any convergent causal discovery algorithm, GIT converges if we allow a uniform sampling of intervention with small probability ε > 0


## Metrics

# Structural Hamming Distance [SHD](){:target="_blank"}

Extension: A continuous Structural Intervention Distance to compare Causal Graphs [SID](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.16452.pdf){:target="_blank"}

